data set url 
 https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/thegupta/ted-talks-audio/data

 meta data: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/thegupta/ted-talk?utm_source=chatgpt.com 

Pre_processing.py
Purpose: This module is responsible for standardizing raw podcast audio files into a format optimized for AI transcription models (specifically OpenAI Whisper). It ensures consistency across the dataset and improves model inference speed.

Key Features:

Format Standardization: Automatically converts input audio (MP3, FLAC, raw WAV) into WAV format (16-bit PCM).

Resampling: Downsamples all audio to 16,000 Hz (16kHz).

Why: This is the native sample rate required by the Whisper model. It reduces file size and processing overhead without losing speech clarity.

Mono Conversion: Mixes stereo channels (Left/Right) into a single Mono track.

Why: Speech recognition models analyze a single waveform; stereo data is redundant and doubles the memory usage.

Volume Normalization: Rescales the audio amplitude so the peak volume is consistent (1.0).

Why: Prevents issues where quiet recordings result in missed transcriptions.

Incremental Processing:

The script checks if a processed version of a file already exists in the output directory.

Feature: If found, it skips the file ("Skipping Logic"). This allows you to add new files to the dataset and run the script again without reprocessing the entire library.

Automated Verification:

At the end of the process, the script randomly selects one processed file and performs a "Before vs. After" spot check.

It prints a comparison of Sample Rate, Channel Count, and File Size to the console to verify the transformation was successful.

Workflow:

Scans the podcast_data/audio directory for new files.

Processes only new files (converting to 16kHz Mono WAV).

Saves cleaned files to podcast_data/processed_audio.

Reports the number of files processed vs. skipped.

Dependencies:

librosa (Audio analysis and loading)

soundfile (Writing WAV files)

numpy (Matrix operations for normalization)

tqdm (Progress bar visualization)

transcription: open ai wisper 
task 3:check transciption quality. (nlp matrix)
task 5: generating short summary.
task 5: segmentation of audio trans. is should segmented.

git when update to push update

1.git add .
2.git commit -m "Update project files"
3.git push origin intern-mohd_farrakh